
Earthquakes, hereafter defined as those originating from tectonic activity and governed by elastic-rebound theory, are very difficult to accurately predict, especially concerning their exact time, location, and magnitude. Indeed, some scientists have argued that the "prediction of major earthquakes is, in any practical sense, impossible" ([[Matthews, 1997]]). Yet, what is more practical is the identification of high-risk areas and the prediction of the frequency of high-magnitude events through statistical seismology and a physical understanding of earthquake mechanisms and the earthquake cycle ([[Avouac, 2015]]; [[Métois et al., 2016]]). Thus, through these two approaches, the spatial and temporal distribution of earthquakes can be predicted, which can inform disaster-risk reduction. This essay will discuss each in turn, and their effectiveness as well as limitations in earthquake prediction.

Statistical seismology provides laws about the frequency and magnitude of earthquakes ([[Avouac, 2015]]), which aids earthquake prediction, but not necessarily their exact timing. The Gutenberg-Richter Law ([[Gutenberg and Richter, 1944]]) governs much of statistical seismology and states that:
$$
\log_{10}N = a - bM,
$$
or otherwise,
$$
N = 10^{a - bM},
$$
where $N$ is the number of earthquakes having a magnitude greater than or equal to M in a given region and tiem period, and $a$ and $b$ are constants representing the total seismicity rate and the relative frequency of earthquakes with respect to their magnitude, respectively. The constants can be derived from earthquake observations using a maximum likelihood function ([[Aki, 1965]]). $b$, or more commonly referred to as the b-value, is close to unity globally ([[Lay and Wallace, 1995]]), meaning that for a given magnitude earthquake, M, there are 10 times fewer earthquakes greater than magnitude M+1. This log-linear relationship breaks down at lower earthquake magnitudes, owing to the inability to detect very small seismic events which can bias the estimation of the a-value and b-value. Thus, the magnitude of completeness is used to refer to the point at which the Gutenberg-Richter Law no longer holds ([[Weimer and Wyss, 2000]]), which is used as a cut off for their prediction. Thus, given the availability of earthquake events for the calibration of the a- and b-values, and the assumption that the seismicity remains constant over time, the frequency of earthquakes can be predicted. This therefore provides a probabilistic assessment of the temporal distribution of earthquakes within a region ([[Avouac, 2015]]). This assessment is useful in disaster-risk reduction, whereby deterministic modelling of a certain magnitude earthquake can be used to evaluate, for instance, building collapses in a region at a given earthquake magnitude with an estimated recurrence period ([[Frolova et al., 2016]]), or what constitutes a 'once in a thousand year event' which is considered in the building of nuclear power plants. Therefore, the temporal frequency of earthquakes can be predicted, as well as their respective impacts on human populations using deterministic modelling.

In addition to providing long-term temporal estimates of earthquake frequency, observations of the b-value using running estimates show that the b-value is not consistent in time ([[Smith, 1981]]; [[Gulia and Weimer, 2019]]). The short-term fluctuations in the b-value potentially enable two types of earthquake prediction. First, as a precursor for an earthquake ([[Chan et al., 2024]]), and secondly, for real-time monitoring of foreshocks ([[Gulia and Weimer, 2019]]). Early work by Smith (1981) observed that in regions near the epicenter of M_w ≥ 6 earthquakes in New Zealand displayed an increase in the b-value prior to shaking, which then returned to normal following shaking. Consequently, it was suggested that monitoring fluctuations in a running estimate of the b-value could be used as a precursor for earthquakes, enabling their prediction ([[Smith, 1981]]). However, different studies have shown that the b-value decreases in the years before $M ≥ 6$ earthquakes (e.g., [[Imoto, 1991]]). A lower b-value indicates that there are fewer small earthquakes relative to large ones, indicating increasing stress on a fault - thereby suggesting the increased likelihood of a major macro-failure. More recent studies with more advanced seismic networks which improve the quality of observations through the detection of smaller magnitude seismic shaking, corroborate a lower b-value as a precursor for earthquales ([[Chan et al., 2024]]). For instance, Chan et al (2024) examined b-value variations prior to M_w ≥ 6 earthquakes in Taiwan and find that many large earthquakes occurred in regions with low b-values in the year prior. However, their findings are inconsistent, and earthquakes are not always associated with a prior drop in the b-value, nor is a drop in the b-value always associated with an earthquake, making them inconsistent precursors for predicting earthquakes.

With respect to real-time monitoring, Gulia and Weimer (2019) suggest that the real-time monitoring of the b-value during an earthquake enables the prediction of whether an earthquake is the main shock or only a foresock with a more significant shock still to come. This has implications for real-time disaster management in order to inform authorities on whether to continue evacuation measures following seismic activity ([[Gulia and Weimer, 2019]]). Gulia and Weimer (2019) exploit the fact that the time after a moderate or larger shock provides the most data-rich period during the earthquake cycle, with thousands of aftershocks or potential foreshocks enabling the observation of spatial and temporal changes in the b-value at resolutions 1-10 thousand times higher than normal conditions. Gulia et al. (2005) find that b-values following a main shock typically increase by 20-30%. Thus, Gulia and Weimer (2019) suggest that if a rise in the b-value is not observed following a large shock, then it is a precursor for an even larger shock still to come. Indeed, in their assessment of b-value sequences during the 2016 Amatrice and Norcia earthquakes in Italy, initial M_w 6 earthquakes did not result in an increase in the b-value. 28 hours and 2 months later, respectively, a larger main shock occurred, which was then followed by an increase in the b-value. Thus, this real time monitoring of the b-value could enable the prediction of soon-to-come mainshocks, which helps to inform authorities on evacuation measures. However, similarly to the b-value as a precursor, other studies find contrasting results. Dascher-Couseau et al. (2020) apply Gulia and Weimer's (2019) framework to a 2016 earthquake in Ridgecrest, California, and find no increase in the b-value following its main shock, thereby highlighting spatial discrepancies in b-value monitoring and the difficulty in accurate earthquake prediction. Not only are there discrepancies between earthquake events, but also real-time monitoring requires advanced monitoring networks which must remain operational during events, thereby highlighting the technological role in earthquake prediction. 

A physical understanding of the earthquake cycle and spatially monitoring of strain accumulation and release enables the prediction of where future earthquakes may occur, but not necessarily when they may. The use of GPS sensors and satellite imagery enables the monitoring of surface velocities of plates along faults, which permits the estimation of where stress is being released or accumulating ([[Métois et al., 2016]]). Where stress is not being released is the most important for earthquake prediction for they are a likely location for future earthquakes given stress is building. Indeed, Barbot et al. (2023) used satellite radar to monitor which parts of the North Anatolian Fault moved and by what magnitude alongside modelling of energy release to see what parts of the fault did not release their energy. They noted a distinct seismic gap where energy was not released and this was the location of a later earthquake a year later in September 2024. Thus, this coseismic approach of monitoring and modelling energy release can help us understand where energy was released, and most importantly, where it was not, which can inform future earthquake prediction and planning.

An interseismic approach enables the prediction of how much energy is being stored on faults which will eventually be released in an earthquake, thereby enhancing the predictive capabilities of future seismic events. Similar to the coseismic approach, the strain rate can be estimated using velocity tracking either from GPS or satellite imagery to inform models of energy build up ([[Hussain et al., 2018]]; [[Weiss et al., 2020]]). Strain rates have been found to remain constant in space along the North Anatolian Fault except in regions where an earthquake occurred in the last 10 years ([[Hussain et al., 2018]]). Given that different sections of the fault have faulted at different times, space can be used as a proxy for time in the seismic cycle across the fault. Thus, a constant spatial strain accumulation rate implies a constant temporal strain accumulation rate ([[Hussain et al., 2018]]). Consequently, short-term geodetic assessments of the strain rate can provide long-term predictions of strain accumulation along a fault, thereby enabling the prediction of the intensity of future earthquakes.

To conclude, earthquake hazards can be predicted using statistical seismology and spatial approaches using velocity tracking and modelling. Statistical seismology governs the probabilistic assessment of the frequency and magnitude of earthquakes, while spatial approaches inform where earthquakes are most likely to occur. Both of these approaches enable the planning of disaster-risk reduction strategies given estimates of the likelihood of certain earthquake events and predictions on where they will most likely occur next. However, these approaches still fail to predict exactly when earthquakes will happen, which remains a huge limitation in earthquake risk management. Furthermore, discrepancies between different studies limit the application of statistical seismology in real-time hazard management, highlighting gaps in our physical understanding of the mechanisms behind earthquakes, gaps which must be addressed if these methods are to be robustly implemented in future disaster risk reduction.








