Multi-hazards refer to the range of major hazards facing a country which can occur simultaneously, cascadingly, or increase the likelihood of other hazards (UNDRR, 2020; Tilloy et al., 2019). Therefore, multi-hazard disaster risk management seeks to understand the various interactions between hazards in order to effectively mitigate their interrelated effects to increase resilience and enhance recovery (UNDRR, 2015). Seismic hazards are a geological hazard originating from tectonic activity and involve primary hazards such as ground-shaking from earthquakes and secondary hazards such as tsunamis, landslides, and building collapse. Hydrometeorological hazards are categorised as atmospheric, hydrological, or oceanographic (UNDRR, 2020) and occur due to either a surplus or deficit of water availability, temperature, or wind speed. Seismic and hydrometeorological hazards interact in several ways through space and time, complicating disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies. This essay will outline three key multi-hazard interactions between seismic and hydrometeorological hazards and use case studies to highlight their complication of DRR.

One example of a multihazard interaction is the relationship between earthquakes and landslides, which are exacerbated by rainfall, a hydrometeorological hazard. First, the direct relationship between earthquakes and landslides will be outlined, followed by how rainfall interacts. Earthquakes can directly cause landslides through ground shaking, which lowers the factor of safety and can destabilise slopes (Terzaghi, 1950). This is an example of a direct, cascading relationship between the primary hazard (earthquakes) and a secondary hazard (landslides) (Tilloy et al., 2019). If a slope does not collapse initially during an earthquake, it may be degraded through a lowering of its factor of safety, thereby increasing the likelihood of collapse during future events which lower its factor of safety (Jabadoyeff et al., 2016). Rainfall interacts with landslides by decreasing the factor of safety by increasing the pore pressure within soil (Sidle and Ochiai, 2006). Indeed, rainfall is the largest driver of landslides globally (Froude and Petley, 2018). Thus, rainfall occurring prior to an earthquake can saturate and precondition slopes to be more likely to fail during an earthquake. Or else, rainfall occurring following an earthquake can trigger landslides on slopes weakened by an earthquake, which may otherwise have not been vulnerable to collapse from the same magnitude of rainfall. For example, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake in Nepal, April 2015, triggered 10s of thousands of landslides (Bilam, 2015). Further landslides were triggered in subsequent monsoon seasons, which the 2015 earthquake would have exacerbated. This complicates DRR because an earthquake's short-term impacts can be elevated, via increased landslide prevalence. This has a large human impact because landslides occur disproportionately more often in and around areas of human activity (McAdoo et al., 2018), owing to human activity (e.g., road building) weakening slopes (Hearn, 2011). Furthermore, landslides can block access routes to areas in need of aid, thereby hampering the recovery process. Indeed, during the 1976 earthquake in Guatemala, many landslides along roads and railways blocked vital transport routes, delaying aid delivery (Plaker et al., 1976). In the long term, the weakening of slopes increases their disposition to landsliding, which will continue until other processes (e.g., compaction) increase the factor of safety. This complicates DRR because the temporal impacts of earthquakes are extended, for rainfall at any time following an earthquake, whether days, months, or years, can cause landslides on earthquake-weakened slopes. Thus, this highlights a hazard interaction between earthquakes and hydrometeorological hazards via cascading or change-making relationships with landslide occurrence, which hampers DRR by either exacerbating earthquake impacts in the short term or resulting in long-term weakening of slopes, making them more vulnerable to rainfall.

Another example of a multihazard interaction is cold waves or heat waves occurring simultaneously or following an earthquake, which hampers disaster recovery. During earthquakes, residents are advised to evacuate to outdoor locations to reduce their risk to building collapse (UGS, n.d.). Thus, they are then exposed to the current weather conditions at the time, often with inadequate clothing due to a hastened evacuation. Earthquakes occurring during the night time can mean people are further underdressed, increasing their exposure to adverse weather conditions, which can increase the risk of hypothermia. Thus, this complicates DRR and the provision of adequate clothing /andor evacuation facilities is essential for mitigating simultaneously occurring adverse weather conditions. For example, the Turkey 2023 February 6th earthquake occurred during winter and especially freezing conditions (Papazafeiropoulos and Plevris, 2023; Hussain et al., 2023). The case of the Turkey 2023 earthquake also demonstrates the longer-term exposure of people to hydrometeorological hazards. Often, the immediate casualties are reported as the main impacts of earthquakes. However, for those rendered homeless, the effects of the earthquake are felt for the entire rebuilding process, which stretches the recovery process. More than 230,000 buildings collapsed or were damaged, rendering 1.4 million people homeless, many of whom were living in tents, thereby increasing their exposure to cold weather conditions. As part of the recovery process, tents were slowly replaced with metal containers to provide a more semi-permanent living situation for those displaced by the earthquake. Whilst reducing their exposure to cold conditions, metal containers are very vulnerable to heat waves, and indeed heat waves followed in the summer of 2023. Thus, the active process of mitigating vulnerability to one hazard (cold waves) increases the vulnerability to other hazards (heat waves), which heavily complicates DRR because the effect of mitigation strategies on other hazards must be considered (Ward et al., 2022). Thus, the exposure of people to adverse weather conditions following an earthquake complicates the recovery process through both the immediate exposure during evacuation and the long term exposure during the rebuilding and recovery process. Mitigation measures against one form of exposure exacerbate vulnerability to other hazards, thereby complicating risk management.

A third example of a hazard interaction is the triggering of tsunamis following an earthquake. This demonstrates a direct cascading relationship between earthquakes and tsunamis, a hydrological hazard. Earthquakes occurring in coastal regions can result in near-field tsunamis, reaching the shore in 20-40 minutes (Amini et al., 2024). It is financially unviable to be completely protected from tsunami hazards (Klyachko, 2023). Therefore, risk is mitigated largely through evacuation, by removing people from the areas vulnerable to inundation. However, this complicates DRR because people are advised either to seek higher elevation or, if unavailable, to reside atop tall, reinforced buildings. Whilst negating the tsunami risk, this then places people at a greater risk to further cascading hazards caused by aftershock. The residence in a building, which the main shock may have damaged, increases vulnerability to building collapse in potential subsequent aftershocks. Meanwhile, seeking higher elevation ground may increase the exposure to landslides, which occur more frequently on steeper relief (Sidle and Ochiai, 2006). Therefore, this complicates DRR because risk becomes dynamic and not solely a function of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability, but also of time because the movement of people affects their risk dynamically (Selva, 2013; Gill et al., 2021). Thus, risk to one hazard is lowered but risk to another is raised - thereby demonstrating the complexity of DRR in a multi-hazard setting.

****NOTE: tsunamis do not count as a hydrometeorological hazard - I would instead do earthquakes causing landslides, which creates quake lakes***
Use: 
The Guatemala Magnitude 7.5 earthquake in 1976 triggered multiple aftershocks and more than 10,000 landslides, rock falls, and debris flows (Harp et al., 1981). Many mass movements occurred along poorly built roads and railways, blocking vital transport routes (Plafker et al., 1976). Mass movements further blocked rives and triggered upstream flooding, and the breaching of landslide dams resulted in further flooding ([[Harp et al., 1981]])



To conclude, there are various multi-hazard interactions between seismic and hydrometeorological hazards. This essay has three hazard interactions: 1) rainfall loosening soil making it more prone to landslides during an earthquake or following an earthquake which loosens soil - an example of a cascading or change-making relationship with a long temporal scale; 2) earthquake evacuation/homelessness caused by building collapse exposes people to adverse weather conditions which can have immediate effects or longer effects during the recovery process; and 3) tsunami evacuation measures raise the vulnerability of people to further ground shaking which complicates DRR via the need to consider risk as a function of time, as well as space. In the aftermath of an earthquake, a population is rendered more vulnerable to exposure to other hazards not limited to hydrometeorological hazards.  Thus future actions and multihazard frameworks must consider the temporal effects of multihazard interactions for more effective disaster risk managment.  