For cloud droplets to form through homogenous nucleation, relative humidities of 200% are typically required, or a very low air temperature for water molecules to have a very low kinetic energy (~-40 Celcius) – these conditions are rare in the atmosphere (Ackerman and Knox, 2011). Therefore, heterogenous nucleation – where non-water molecules act as condensation nuclei – is crucial to cloud droplet formation. Koehler Theory describes the activation of cloud droplet and their growth around a nucleus (Köhler, 1936). It is described by the Koehler curve which gives the general equilibrium relation between an aqueous salt solution droplet – an activated cloud condensation nucleus – and water vapour (McFiggans et al., 2006). It considers two competing effects which are dictated by the size of a cloud droplet and its solute nucleus, as well as environmental conditions. These effects are the Raoult, or solute, effect and the Kelvin, or curvature, effect. This essay will discuss these two effects and their contribution to Koehler theory. It will also address the limitations of Koehler theory.

The near-field of a droplet is in an instantaneous equilibrium with its surrounding environment and the water vapour concentration is given by the saturation vapour pressure of the specific droplet. The Raoult effect describes the relationship between the vapour pressure and the mole fraction of a solute in a solution. In the context of cloud droplets, the cloud condensation nucleus (CNN) is the solute, and the solution, is the condensed water around it. CNNs are hygroscopic and therefore attract water molecules and, most importantly, their attraction of water molecules is greater than the individual attraction of other water molecules. Consequently, CNNs allow for condensation to occur at a lower vapour pressure than required for homogenous nucleation and permit condensation at relative humidities less than 100%. However, as condensation occurs, the cloud droplet grows in size which causes the solution to become more dilute, which reduces the attraction between the CNN at the centre of the cloud droplet and water molecules at its surface. Thus, the saturation vapour pressure increases, inhibiting droplet growth. The Raoult effect describes this, and, under ideal conditions, the saturation vapour pressure increases proportionally to the mole fraction of water within a solution. Thus, as a water droplet grows, the saturation vapour pressure owing to the Raoult effect increases. However, whilst the solute effect permits the formation of small droplets by condensation, it is opposed by the highly curved nature of small cloud droplets – which is captured by the Kelvin effect.

The Kelvin effect, or curvature effect, describes the relationship between a cloud droplet’s radius and the vapour pressure at the liquid-vapour interface. At very small radii, a droplet’s surface is highly curved and thus, each water molecules has fewer neighbouring water molecules attracting each other, making evaporation easier. Thus, the saturation vapour pressure increases. Conversely, larger water droplets’ surfaces are much ‘flatter’ (in the near-field – a truly flat water droplet would need an infinite radius) and thus have more neighbouring water molecules to attract each other. Consequently, evaporation is more difficult and the saturation vapour pressure is lower. Thus, as a droplet grows in size, the saturation vapour pressure owing to the Kelvin effect decreases. 

These two effects compete with each other and the Koehler curve combines the two. At small cloud droplet radii, the Kelvin effect dominates, and it is difficult for cloud droplets to initially grow. Any growth increases the saturation vapour pressure, making growth even more difficult. However, the Koehler curve has a turning point, whereby after this turning point, which occurs at a critical droplet radius, droplet growth results in a lower saturation vapour pressure (due to the Kelvin effect). The exact critical radius is dependent on the properties of the CNN and the environment (e.g., temperature), but it is typically around 0.05 – 0.5 μm (Ackerman and Knox, 2011). Upon surpassing the critical radius, the cloud droplet is said to be activated, and any further growth reduces the saturation vapour pressure, enabling more condensation, which further reduces the saturation vapour pressure. Thus, a positive feedback loop occurs, and the droplet grows continuously. However, there are two main limits to this growth, which are not captured by the Koehler curve. 

First, is the presence of water vapour for condensation. Continuous growth requires the presence of water vapour molecules in the far-field which can move to the near-field and condense on the water droplet. Thus, there must be a concentration gradient in vapour between the near- and far-field which enables water molecules to move down a concentration gradient toward droplets. Thus, the growth rate is dependent on the rate at which water molecules can move from the far-field to the near-field. The speed of which is dependent on the pressure and temperature – higher temperatures and pressures result in faster movement and a higher concentration of water molecules.

Temperature plays a secondary role. The Koehler curve assumes thermodynamic equilibrium. However, the condensation of water droplets on a cloud droplet will release latent heat which increases the temperature of the near-field. Consequently, the saturation vapour pressure increases, negating some of the decrease by the Kelvin effect. If the release of latent heat is not dissipated from the near-field, then eventually growth will stop. Thus, overall, condensational growth is reliant on a water vapour concentration gradient which moves water molecules toward the cloud droplet and a thermal gradient which dissipates the release of latent heat from condensation. 

Furthermore, because the Koehler curve approaches zero as a cloud droplet grows – it approaches being a flat surface with a homogenous composition – further growth beyond this cannot be explained by the Koehler curve. Indeed, toward droplets 10 μm in size, the net effects of the Raoult and Kelvin effects are very little. However, raindrops in the atmosphere are observed to be several millimetres in size and thus, their growth cannot be explained using Koehler theory. Rather, Koehler theory is responsible for explaining the initial activation and growth of a cloud droplet, and then other processes are responsible for growth into larger cloud droplets and eventually rain droplets. The collisions and coagulation of smaller cloud droplets to form larger cloud droplets of the size observed in precipitation is essential for further cloud droplet growth which is no longer captured by Koehler theory. Furthermore, Koehler theory only applies to the formation of cloud droplets in the liquid phase – thus, warm clouds. Ice droplet formation is not governed by the Koehler curve. 

To conclude, Koehler theory helps to explain the initial activation and growth of cloud droplets. The Koehler curve is the balance between the Raoult (solute) effect and Kelvin (curvature) effect. The movement of water molecules from the far-field to the near-field as well as the release of latent heat modify the instantaneous equilibrium at in the near-field at the liquid-vapour interface which is not explained by the Koehler curve. Finally, Koehler theory is only applicable to the growth of liquid phase cloud droplets in warm clouds. Ice droplet formation is governed by different processes.

