2025-02-12 23:42


Paper: [[II - Atmospherics]]

DOI:

URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1094411

Tags: [[Atmospherics - Clouds]]

Status:
# The complex interaction of aerosols and clouds


- Aerosols influence the radiative budget directly and indirectly 
	- Primary: scattering
	- Secondary: Modification of cloud droplet size spectrum
	- . V. Ramanathan, P. J. Crutzen, J. T. Kiehl, D. Rosenfeld, Science 294, 2119 (2001).
- Large ice nuclei and many small condensation nuclei can supress hetergenous freezing - resulting in small droplets supercooling to the temperature at which homogenous freezing ocurs 
	- D. Rosenfeld, W. L. Woodley, Nature 405, 440 (2000).
- If precipitation is suppressed in deep convective clouds (DCC), more water vapour is injected into the upper troposphere forom cloud tops, therby influencing cirrus cloud formation and perhaps stratospheric water content
	- S. Sherwood, Science 295, 1272 (2002).
- Aerosol pollution of DCC creates mixed water-ice compositions which makes lightning more common which can further induce wildfires, producing more aerosols.
- Aerosols have a larger impact on clouds over land than the sea -> sea salt contributes to land and more land sources
	- Provides a wider spectrum for cloud droplet size
	- D. Rosenfeld, R. Lahav, A. Khain, M. Pinsky, Science 297, 1667 (2002).
	- Sea salt presence over land is dependent on the production and vertical/horizontal transport of sea salt particles to the cloud base over land.
- Deep tropical convection and the formation of precipitation results in the release of large quantities of latent heat - drives general circulation of the atmosphere. 
- When considering the average effect of surface heating, radiative processes, and latent heat release across latitude belts, the only significant source of heating in the tropical free troposphere is the latent heat released from DCC in the tropics
- Aerosols affect the efficiency of cloud formation and therefore affect latent heat release.
- 
