The delayed oscillator theory (Jin, 1997) is a theory to explain the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), whereby the propagation of oceanic Kelvin waves eastward and the propagation of oceanic Rossby waves westward redistribute ocean heat by modifying the depth of the thermocline. To explain how the delayed oscillator theory is explained by the propagation of waves, the mechanisms behind Rossby and Kelvin waves must be discussed, which outline the way in which they propagate. After which, their context within the delayed oscillator theory can be discussed.

Kelvin waves are a type of gravity wave which are affected by the Coriolis force and are trapped against a boundary where a geostrophic balance is unachievable (Wang, 2003). The change in the sign of the Coriolis force at the equator acts as a boundary. The direction of propagation along the equator is only eastward - when moving eastward slightly north of the equator, the Coriolis force acts southward, trapping the purtubation to the equator. Similarly, when moving eastward slightly south of the equator, the Coriolis force acts northward, thereby also trapping the perturbation to the equator. Westward propagation is not possible, because the change in sign of the Coriolis force either side of the equator would result in divergence, and thus, dissipation of the perturbation. Topographic boundaries also prevent geostrophic flow because water is unable to move through a coastline. Thus, such boundaries only occur when the direction of movement results in a Coriolis force toward the coastline: where the coastline is on the right of the direction movement in the NH, and when it is on the left of the direction of movement in the SH.

Rossby waves meanwhile, are waves which conserve absolute vorticity - $\zeta + f$. Their direction of propagation is as a result of the mechanism by which oscillation occurs. Consider a parcel that is is displaced polewards. Its poleward displacement causes it to gain planetary vorticity. To conserve absolute vorticity, the relative vorticity must decrease, which induces clockwise (anticyclonic) rotation. **TEXT ABOUT HOW OSCILLATION DEVELOPS I CBA RN**. Consequently, water to the west of ridges is moved equatorward and water to the west of troughs is moved northwards, resulting in westward propagation (Lynch and Cassano, 2006)

Now that the direction and mechanisms of propagation have been discussed, these will be placed in the context of explaining the delayed oscillator theory. Typically, easterly winds blow across the pacific, creating a local rise in sea surface height in the western Pacific. Consequently, the thermocline is pushed down. The thermocline marks the transition between warm surface water and cold deep water. The deeper thermocline results in an increase in sea surface temperatures in the west Pacific and cooler in the east Pacific. When westerly anomalies occur, water is pushed towards the central/eastern Pacific, raising the local sea surface height, causing an adjustment in the water column, pushing the thermocline down, raising sea surface temperatures. This anomaly on the equator then propagates into the eastern Pacific as a downwelling Kelvin wave, raising eastern Pacific sea surface temperatures. Kelvin waves take approximately 2-3 months to propagate across the Pacific (Wang, 20003). Upon reaching the coast of South America, the equatorial Kelvin waves are diverted meridionally and travel as coastal Kelvin waves. These Kelvin waves are then reflected and return as upwelling westward propagating Rossby waves which propagate westward at half the speed of the eastward propagating Kelvin waves. Upon propagating into the western Pacific, the Rossby waves are reflected as upwelling equatorial Kelvin waves, which propagate into the central and eastern Pacific, offsetting the warming anomaly, thereby providing a negative feedback mechanism to shift El Niňo conditions into La Niñ conditions. A new El Niño cycle can then begin once sufficient ocean heat content has built up in the West Pacific. 